# A Python API for accessing Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) database in parallel

The Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) Program of the US Forest Service provides the information needed to assess America's forests. Many researchers rely on forest attribute estimations from the FIA program to evaluate forest conditions. US Forest Service provides multiple methods to use FIA database (FIADB) including EVALIDator and FIA Data Mart. The FIA Data Mart allows users to download raw data files and SQLite databases. Among the available formats, only SQLite database is an option for a large number of queries. To use SQLite database, users require to download entire database (10GB) and establish a local SQLite server. Beside the complexity of the query commands, the local database size growing very fast by implementing more queries. Also, Forest Service update FIADB regularly and for access to new releases users need to update the local server periodically.

On the other hand, EVALIDator relies on the HTML queries and allows users to produce a large variety of population estimates through a web-application with the lowest level of difficulty. However, EVALIDator provides a single query at the time and it makes the web-application not suitable for collecting a large FIA data. The Python API uses the JSON query system to collect large data from FIADB in parallel. It uses EVALIDator to access FIADB, but it can handle large number of queries at a time.

In this project we used Python and Slurm workload manager to generate numerous parallel workers and distribute them across the cluster. The API is designed to scale up the query process such that by increasing processing elements (PE) the process expected to speedup linearly. The API can be set up and configured to be run on a single core computer or in a cluster for any given year, state, coordinate, and forest attribute. It can also search for the closest available FIA survey year to each query and provides a real-time access to most recent releases FIADB. After collecting requested information, outputs are stored on CSV and JSON files and can be used by other scientific software.
